gh-101100: Consolidate documentation on `ModuleType` attributes (#124709)
python/cpython: Doc/reference/datamodel.rst

.. index::
   single: __name__ (module attribute)
   single: __spec__ (module attribute)
   single: __package__ (module attribute)
   single: __loader__ (module attribute)
   single: __path__ (module attribute)
   single: __file__ (module attribute)
   single: __cached__ (module attribute)
   single: __doc__ (module attribute)
   single: __annotations__ (module attribute)
   single: __annotate__ (module attribute)
   pair: module; namespace

.. _import-mod-attrs:

Import-related attributes on module objects
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Module objects have the following attributes that relate to the

> :ref:`importsystem`. When a module is created using the machinery associated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`import system <importsystem>`. When a module is created using the machinery associated
```

Suggested so this doesn't render as "the The import system"

with the import system, these attributes are filled in based on the module's
:term:`spec <module spec>`, before the :term:`loader` executes and loads the
module.

To create a module dynamically rather than using the import system,
it's recommended to use :func:`importlib.util.module_from_spec`,
which will set the various import-controlled attributes to appropriate values.
It's also possible to use the :class:`types.ModuleType` constructor to create
modules directly, but this technique is more error-prone, as most attributes
must be manually set on the module object after it has been created when using

> this method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this approach.
```

With the exception of :attr:`~module.__name__`, it is **strongly** recommended
that you rely on :attr:`~module.__spec__` and its attributes instead of any of

> the other individual attributes listed in this subsection.

Reviewer: Do we want to say that Python does not guarantee that the module attributes and the `__spec__` attributes are kept in sync after the initial creation of the module?   IOW, if you change `m.__spec__.name` that isn't reflected in `m.__name__` and vice versa.

Author: I added some more words to this paragraph, along with a small illustrative doctest

.. attribute:: module.__name__

   The name used to uniquely identify the module in the import system.
   For a directly executed module, this will be set to ``"__main__"``.

   This attribute must be set to the fully qualified name of the module.
   It is expected to match the value of
   :attr:`module.__spec__.name <importlib.machinery.ModuleSpec.name>`.

.. attribute:: module.__spec__

   A record of the module's import-system-related state.

   Set to the :class:`module spec <importlib.machinery.ModuleSpec>` that was
   used when importing the module. See :ref:`module-specs` for more details.

>    When :attr:`__spec__.parent <importlib.machinery.ModuleSpec.parent>` is not

Reviewer: This looks incongruous; was it pasted into the wrong place?

Author: looks like it, thanks.

Author: Actually it looks like the existing reference for `__spec__` includes this note: <https://docs.python.org/3/reference/import.html#spec__>

But I agree that it would be better in the reference for `__package__`, so I'll move it there

   set, :attr:`~module.__package__` is used as a fallback.

   .. versionadded:: 3.4

   .. versionchanged:: 3.6
      :attr:`__spec__.parent <importlib.machinery.ModuleSpec.parent>` is used
      as a fallback when :attr:`~module.__package__` is not defined.

.. attribute:: module.__package__

   The :term:`package` a module belongs to.

>    If the module is top-level (i.e. not a part of any specific package)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   If the module is top-level (that is, not a part of any specific package)
```

https://devguide.python.org/documentation/style-guide/#use-simple-language

>    then the attribute should be set to ``''``. Otherwise, it should be set to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   then the attribute should be set to ``''`` (the empty string). Otherwise, it should be set to
```

   the name of the module's package (which can be equal to
   :attr:`module.__name__` if the module itself is a package). See :pep:`366`
   for further details.

   This attribute is used instead of :attr:`~module.__name__` to calculate
   explicit relative imports for main modules. It defaults to ``None`` for
   modules created dynamically using the :class:`types.ModuleType` constructor;
   use :func:`importlib.util.module_from_spec` instead to ensure the attribute
   is set to a :class:`str`.

   It is **strongly** recommended that you use
   :attr:`module.__spec__.package <importlib.machinery.ModuleSpec.parent>`
   instead of :attr:`!module.__package__`.

   .. versionchanged:: 3.4
      This attribute now defaults to ``None`` for modules created dynamically
      using the :class:`types.ModuleType` constructor.
      Previously the attribute was optional.

   .. versionchanged:: 3.6

>       The value of :attr:`!__package__`` is expected to be the same as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      The value of :attr:`!__package__` is expected to be the same as
```

Author: Whoops, good catch!

      :attr:`__spec__.parent <importlib.machinery.ModuleSpec.parent>`.

   .. versionchanged:: 3.10
      :exc:`ImportWarning` is raised if import falls back to
      :attr:`!__package__` instead of
      :attr:`~importlib.machinery.ModuleSpec.parent`.

   .. versionchanged:: 3.12
      Raise :exc:`DeprecationWarning` instead of :exc:`ImportWarning`
      when falling back to :attr:`!__package__`.

   .. deprecated-removed:: 3.13 3.15
      :attr:`!__package__` will cease to be set or taken into consideration
      by the import system or standard library.

.. attribute:: module.__loader__

   The :term:`loader` object that the import machinery used to load the module.

   This attribute is mostly useful for introspection, but can be used for
   additional loader-specific functionality, for example getting data
   associated with a loader.

   :attr:`!__loader__` defaults to ``None`` for modules created dynamically
   using the :class:`types.ModuleType` constructor;
   use :func:`importlib.util.module_from_spec` instead to ensure the attribute
   is set to a :term:`loader` object.

>    It is **strongly** recommended that use

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   It is **strongly** recommended that you use
```

   :attr:`module.__spec__.loader <importlib.machinery.ModuleSpec.loader>`
   instead of :attr:`!module.__loader__`.

   .. versionchanged:: 3.4
      This attribute now defaults to ``None`` for modules created dynamically
      using the :class:`types.ModuleType` constructor.
      Previously the attribute was optional.

   .. versionchanged:: 3.12
      The value of :attr:`!module__loader__` is expected to be the same as
      :attr:`__spec__.loader <importlib.machinery.ModuleSpec.loader>`.
      The use of :attr:`!module.__loader__` is deprecated and slated for

>       removal in Python 3.14.

Reviewer 2: Should this use a `deprecated-removed`?

Is it documented in What's New and `deprecations/pending-removal-in-3.14.rst`?

Author: > Should this use a `deprecated-removed`?

I think that makes sense!

> Is it documented in What's New and `deprecations/pending-removal-in-3.14.rst`?

It doesn't appear so. This note is mostly copied from the note that currently exists at https://docs.python.org/3/reference/import.html#loader__, but with some more cross-reference links added.

I'll change the directive to be `.. deprecated-removed`, but I'm _kinda_ tempted to say that adding a note to "What's new" is out of scope for this PR, which essentially moves documentation around and consolidates it rather than adding new documentation.

Author: I took a stab at improving this a bit in https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/124709/commits/309a9cf03d386b5467cddc8a1de7da4e080b7fc8 and https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/124709/commits/2dca569262d7dd215e6276ad964f1145db47e594!

>    .. deprecated-removed:: 3.12 3.14

Reviewer: Why does this show up in the rendered docs as "Changed in version 3.12:" rather than "Deprecated since version 3.12, will be removed in version 3.14"?
<img width="784" alt="Screenshot 2024-09-27 at 14 48 57" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/96898918-c33d-49df-9a4a-e3ffebd97bda">

Author: Hmm, that's not what I see when building locally:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d9624faa-25d2-44a0-832e-66d9977b7ca7)

Maybe the docs preview on the PR is stale somehow?

Reviewer 2: It's now showing "Deprecated since version 3.12, removed in version 3.14" at [`https://cpython-previews--124709.org.readthedocs.build/en/124709/reference/datamodel.html#module.__loader__`](https://cpython-previews--124709.org.readthedocs.build/en/124709/reference/datamodel.html#module.__loader__)

Reviewer: Yep, the latest preview looks good!

.. attribute:: module.__path__

   A (possibly empty) :term:`sequence` of strings enumerating the locations
   where the package's submodules will be found. Non-package modules should
   not have a :attr:`!__path__` attribute. See :ref:`package-path-rules` for
   more details.

.. attribute:: module.__file__
.. attribute:: module.__cached__

   :attr:`!__file__` and :attr:`!__cached__` are both optional attributes that
   may or may not be set. Both attributes should be a :class:`string <str>`
   when they are available.

   :attr:`!__file__` indicates the pathname of the file from which the module
   was loaded (if loaded from a file), or the pathname of the shared library
   file for extension modules loaded dynamically from a shared library.
   It might be missing for certain types of modules, such as C modules that are
   statically linked into the interpreter, and the
   :ref:`import system <importsystem>` may opt to leave it unset if it

>    has no semantic meaning (e.g. a module loaded from a database).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   has no semantic meaning (for example, a module loaded from a database).
```
or "such as" or something.

   If :attr:`!__file__` is set then the :attr:`!__cached__` attribute might
   also be set,  which is the path to any compiled version of

>    the code (e.g. byte-compiled file). The file does not need to exist

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   the code (for example, a byte-compiled file). The file does not need to exist
```

>    more details.

Reviewer: This should point people to `__spec__.submodule_search_locations`, https://cpython-previews--124709.org.readthedocs.build/en/124709/library/importlib.html#importlib.machinery.ModuleSpec.submodule_search_locations.

>    may or may not be set. Both attributes should be a :class:`string <str>`

Reviewer: Above you use `str` and here you use `string`.  I don't have a strong preference which to use (mildly, the actual type name `str`), but the docs should at least be consistent.

Author: Heh, I think I changed my mind about which I personally preferred halfway through working on the PR. I'll switch to using `str` throughout.

   single: __path__ (module attribute)
   single: __file__ (module attribute)
   single: __cached__ (module attribute)
   single: __doc__ (module attribute)
   single: __annotations__ (module attribute)
   single: __annotate__ (module attribute)
   pair: module; namespace

.. _import-mod-attrs:

Import-related attributes on module objects
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Module objects have the following attributes that relate to the
:ref:`import system <importsystem>`. When a module is created using the machinery associated
with the import system, these attributes are filled in based on the module's
:term:`spec <module spec>`, before the :term:`loader` executes and loads the
module.

To create a module dynamically rather than using the import system,
it's recommended to use :func:`importlib.util.module_from_spec`,
which will set the various import-controlled attributes to appropriate values.
It's also possible to use the :class:`types.ModuleType` constructor to create
modules directly, but this technique is more error-prone, as most attributes
must be manually set on the module object after it has been created when using
this approach.

.. caution::

>    With the exception of :attr:`~module.__name__`, it is **strongly**

Reviewer: I'm wondering about two things here:

1. Should we also mention an exception for `module.__file__` given how unlikely it is we'll ever be able to remove that attribute;
2. In either case, should we continue to recommend they use the `module.__spec__` attributes in preference to the module attributes?  I.e. even for `__name__` recommend using `module.__spec__.name`?  (except that I don't think that works for a typical `if __name__ == '__main__':` section).

CC: @brettcannon

   It is expected to match the value of
   :attr:`module.__spec__.name <importlib.machinery.ModuleSpec.name>`.

.. attribute:: module.__spec__

   A record of the module's import-system-related state.

   Set to the :class:`module spec <importlib.machinery.ModuleSpec>` that was
   used when importing the module. See :ref:`module-specs` for more details.

   .. versionadded:: 3.4

.. attribute:: module.__package__

   The :term:`package` a module belongs to.

   If the module is top-level (that is, not a part of any specific package)
   then the attribute should be set to ``''`` (the empty string). Otherwise,
   it should be set to the name of the module's package (which can be equal to
   :attr:`module.__name__` if the module itself is a package). See :pep:`366`
   for further details.

   This attribute is used instead of :attr:`~module.__name__` to calculate
   explicit relative imports for main modules. It defaults to ``None`` for
   modules created dynamically using the :class:`types.ModuleType` constructor;
   use :func:`importlib.util.module_from_spec` instead to ensure the attribute
   is set to a :class:`str`.

   It is **strongly** recommended that you use

>    :attr:`module.__spec__.package <importlib.machinery.ModuleSpec.parent>`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   :attr:`module.__spec__.parent <importlib.machinery.ModuleSpec.parent>`
```

.. attribute:: module.__loader__

   The :term:`loader` object that the import machinery used to load the module.

   This attribute is mostly useful for introspection, but can be used for
   additional loader-specific functionality, for example getting data
   associated with a loader.

   :attr:`!__loader__` defaults to ``None`` for modules created dynamically
   using the :class:`types.ModuleType` constructor;
   use :func:`importlib.util.module_from_spec` instead to ensure the attribute
   is set to a :term:`loader` object.

   It is **strongly** recommended that you use
   :attr:`module.__spec__.loader <importlib.machinery.ModuleSpec.loader>`
   instead of :attr:`!module.__loader__`.

   .. versionchanged:: 3.4
      This attribute now defaults to ``None`` for modules created dynamically
      using the :class:`types.ModuleType` constructor.
      Previously the attribute was optional.

   .. deprecated-removed:: 3.12 3.14
      The value of :attr:`!module__loader__` is expected to be the same as
      :attr:`__spec__.loader <importlib.machinery.ModuleSpec.loader>`.
      The use of :attr:`!module.__loader__` is deprecated and slated for

>       removal in Python 3.14.

Author: @warsaw, this deprecation note (more-or-less copied from the existing reference for this attribute) feels a lot less precise than some of the others in this section. What exactly is deprecated -- reading the attribute? Writing the attribute? Setting the attribute without setting `module.__spec__.loader`, such that Python's import machinery must fallback to `module.__loader__` rather than using `module.__spec__.loader`?

Reviewer: Specifically what's deprecated is the import machinery (and other bits of Python) falling back to `module.__loader__`, but also anything in Python setting that attribute.   Eventually we plan on ripping out all mention of `module.__loader__`.

CC: @brettcannon

Author: Fab! I took a stab at improving it a bit in https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/124709/commits/fd67e0af1a0d9d16ccd3d9c846310acfeea2fc1f.

Should there also be a deprecation warning in the docs for `__path__`? There isn't one in the docs currently: <https://docs.python.org/3/reference/import.html#path__>

   It is **strongly** recommended that you use
   :attr:`module.__spec__.cached <importlib.machinery.ModuleSpec.cached>`
   instead of :attr:`!module.__cached__`.

   .. deprecated-removed:: 3.13 3.15
      :attr:`!__cached__` will cease to be set or taken into consideration
      by the import system or standard library.

Other writable attributes on module objects
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As well as the import-related attributes listed above, module objects also have
the following writable attributes:

.. attribute:: module.__doc__

   The module's documentation string, or ``None`` if unavailable.
   See also: :attr:`__doc__ attributes <definition.__doc__>`.

.. attribute:: module.__annotations__

   A dictionary containing :term:`variable annotations <variable annotation>`
   collected during module body execution.  For best practices on working with
   :attr:`!__annotations__`, see :mod:`annotationlib`.

   .. versionchanged:: 3.14
      Annotations are now :ref:`lazily evaluated <lazy-evaluation>`.
      See :pep:`649`.

.. attribute:: module.__annotate__

   The :term:`annotate function` for this module, or ``None`` if the module has

>    no annotations. See also: :attr:`__annotate__ attributes <object.__annotate__>`.

Reviewer 3: I guess this will render "attributes" in code formatting? That seems incorrect. (It's possible I wrote this and you just moved it around.)

Author: ```suggestion
   no annotations. See also: :attr:`~object.__annotate__` attributes.
```
